SOME/IP Service Discovery (#1)
ZoranCutura/score: docs/features/communication/some_ip_gateway/service_discovery/index.rst

   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************

.. _some_ip_gateway_service_discovery:

SOME/IP-Gateway Service Discovery
#################################

Abstract
========

Draft plan:

- provided / required services must be configured
- provided services are discovered via lola and then Offer message is sent according to configuration
- required services may trigger sending a FindService message
- When a FindService message is received, the SOME/IP checks if it can find the service locally via lola and when found responds
  - this will not trigger creation of the service internally

Configuration
=============

The configuration tells the SOME/IP communication stack which services it should provide and which services it should require on the network.

> The configuration contains SOME/IP-SD settings and IP interface bindings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration contains SOME/IP and SOME/IP-SD settings as well as IP interface bindings.
```

Configuration is provided as ``json`` files and read at startup.

Provided services
=================

Services available in the local ECU / VM are offered by the SOME/IP gateway once they become internally available and are present in the configuration.
This is done by sending an OfferService message to the SOME/IP network.

Once the service ceased to exist the SOME/IP communication stack sends a StopOfferService message to the SOME/IP network.

For IPC service discovery the features of lola are used by the SOME/IP gateway.

TODO: Does lola inform us that a service is stopped?

Required services
=================

For configured required services, the SOME/IP communication stack will send a FindService message to the SOME/IP network.

TODO: Might not be needed, if OfferService messages for that services have been already received.

> Upon reception of a OfferService message, the SOME/IP communication stack creates a connection and provides the service in the VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon initial reception of a SOME/IP-SD message containing an OfferService entry, the SOME/IP gateway checks if the service has been configured as required service. - If so, the SOME/IP gateway offers the service locally in the ECU / VM.

Here, initial reception is the first reception after a previous service loss or withdrawal, i.e.,
- after the reception of a SOME/IP-SD message containing an StopOfferService entry
- after a TTL expiry of the previous OfferService entry
- after the detection of a reboot of the (remote) service provider
- after a link-down/link-up event
```

As far as the "local connection" is concerned, this needs to be build up by the local service consumers, since the SOME/IP gateway will potentially act as a service provider (even for the same service) to multiple service consumers => potentially there will be multiple connections.

FindService
================

Upon reception of a FindService message, the SOME/IP communication stack checks if the service is available locally and has been configured as provided service.

> If both questions are answered positively, the SOME/IP communication stack sends a ServiceFound message to the sender of the FindService message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If both questions are answered positively, the SOME/IP gateway responds by sending a SOME/IP-SD message containing an OfferService to the sender of the SOME/IP-SD message containing a FindService entry.
```

- (locally) provided services are discovered (locally) via lola and then offered on the network by sending a SOME/IP-SD message with an OfferService entry according to configuration
- (locally) required services may trigger the discovery on the network by sending of a SOME/IP-SD message with a FindService entry
- When a SOME/IP-SD message containing a FindService entry is received, the SOME/IP gateway checks this service has been already offered locally via lola

 - If this is the case, the SOME/IP gateway answers with a SOME/IP-SD message containing a corresponding OfferService entry
 - Otherwise, the SOME/IP gateway initiates a local service discovery via lola. - Once this is successful, he SOME/IP gateway answers with a SOME/IP-SD message containing a corresponding OfferService entry

  - this will not trigger creation of the service internally

Configuration
=============

The configuration tells the SOME/IP communication stack which services it should provide and which services it should require on the network.
The configuration contains SOME/IP and SOME/IP-SD settings as well as IP interface bindings.

> Configuration is provided as ``json`` files and read at startup.

Reviewer 2: should we request in the FR that it must be json?

TODO: is ``json`` a problem?

Provided services
=================

Services available in the local ECU / VM are offered by the SOME/IP gateway once they become internally available and are present in the configuration.
This is done by sending an SOME/IP-SD messages containing an OfferService entry to the network.
As long as the service is locally available the service offering is periodically (according to the configuration) renewed by sending a SOME/IP-SD messages containing an OfferService entry to the network.
Once the service ceased to exist locally, the SOME/IP communication stack sends a SOME/IP-SD message containing a StopOfferService entry to the network.

For IPC service discovery the features of lola are used by the SOME/IP gateway.

> TODO: Does lola inform us that a service is stopped?

Reviewer 2: yes, it's lola, but more generally it would be IPC, as it's called in the feature request.
